Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. For 40 years, a
high school science teacher in Massachusetts has been writing first-class
science fiction. And in the early 1950s, he published one of the classic novels
in the field. That man is Harry C. Stubbs, better known as Hal Clement. Though
he's produced relatively few novels, Clement has a high reputation among his
peers and readers. He writes solid, highly crafted pieces of literature, all
with a characteristic Clement trademark, scientific accuracy and realism. He has
a reputation as one of the best of all hard science fiction writers. We asked
him why he writes the way he does. I'm not sure I'm a good enough psychoanalyst
to answer that. I just feel that I have trouble writing something unless I can
more or less convince myself that it might happen. The best example, I guess,
was my attempt a few years ago to write a story for an anthology of vampire
tales. When I had finished it, I discovered that it was a science fiction story.
I just accounted for everything that happened on a scientific basis, and I
wasn't happy about it until I could account for them that way. Clement's first
story, entitled Proof, was published by the great science fiction editor John W.
Campbell in 1942. Clement says that Campbell helped him a great deal, especially
since the two of them have similar ideas concerning science fiction. We were
both materialists, I guess. We felt that the universe does run by rule, and we
felt that a story was most believable when it matched those rules, at least as
we, we meaning humanity in general, currently understood them. Clement's best
-known work, a genuine science fiction classic, is Mission of Gravity, published
serially by Campbell in the early 1950s. His most recent novel, which came out
in 1981, is Nitrogen Fix. And his emphasis on hard science is obvious in the
book. It's a convincingly realistic account of what the Earth might be like if
all the oxygen were removed from the atmosphere. The result, he thinks, might be
an atmosphere of nitrogen. The idea itself is not new. It was used many years
ago in a story called The Mightiest Machine by John Campbell, in which someone
invented a catalyst which permitted the direct combination of nitrogen and
oxygen to dinitrogen pentoxide. I was more careful quantitatively than John was.
He had the snowflakes of nitrogen pentoxide drifting out of the sky and bursting
into flame as they hit organic matter and oxidized it. And the red-brown gases
that rose when the high oxides of nitrogen got reduced by other things like
organics. And the streams fuming as the oxides of nitrogen boiled into them.
There's a very impressive book, beautiful adventure story. But unfortunately,
there isn't that much oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere. You couldn't have made
that much dinitrogen pentoxide. And I had to tone everything down a good deal
and have the worst of it have happened in the past and try to figure out what
the final results would have been, or intermediate results anyway, a couple of
thousand years after things had started. Clement explains how he got started
writing science fiction 40 years ago. Rather gradually, I was reading the stuff
originally. It started, I think, with the Buck Rogers comic strip. Then I
discovered there were magazines. I began telling the stories that I'd read in
magazines to friends in the grade school playground and to Boy Scouts at
campfires. Then I began correcting some of the errors that I spotted in the
stories and eventually began trying to write my own. He's been writing his own
very successfully for a long while now. Yet his total output is not great
because he can't devote all his time to it. It's been a hobby all along. And in
the last few years, there somehow seems to have been less and less time. I've
been doing more work connected with my profession of high school science
teaching. I'm currently president-elect of the New England Association of
Chemistry Teachers, and I have an awful feeling that's going to take a lot of my
time for the next two and a half years. Join us next time for more about Hal
Clement.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Nothing is more
typical of popular science fiction than alien creatures, and no one is more
adept at inventing aliens than author Hal Clement. If there were such a thing as
an authority on aliens, Clement would certainly qualify. Besides the weird
creatures that turn up in his own work, he's written a fascinating essay on the
subject entitled, The Creation of Imaginary Beings. How does he go about
developing the psychology of an alien creature? I am not sure, first of all,
that an intelligent being's psychology would be all that different from the
human one anyway. It is going to depend on the being's motivation. Presumably,
the creature will be driven so as to survive. He or she or it, or they, if they
have several sexes, are going to have drives to find food, to avoid pain. If
they do have sexes, they will have drives to use them, exercise them. And all of
those will tend to provide motivation recognizably similar to those of humanity.
Clement is a science teacher and a writer of very realistic science fiction.
Yes, and as you might expect, his aliens, as strange as they may be, are
logically constructed from sound scientific principles. His Mesklinite aliens,
for instance, from the novel Mission of Gravity, live in a world of extremely
heavy gravity. As a result, they are loaded to the ground and solidly built with
many legs, similar to caterpillars. Right, he always attempts to construct his
aliens from the particular environment they exist in. In other words, their
world determines what they'll be like. We asked Clement what he thought of
aliens in science fiction movies. How realistic are they? I haven't seen by any
means all of the movie science fiction things. The one that was called Alien, I
gather, was very impressive, but was so mostly by avoiding detailed portrayal of
his or its or her nature, which is, of course, a perfectly good trick. I can't
think of any alien I have seen in a movie who was really believable in
character, believably alien. There were several unnamed species in the bar scene
in the first of the shows, the Star Wars, where the disguise was good. The
arguing back and forth in a completely unintelligible language produced a very
impressive and funny scene. But again, you can't really tell what the
personalities of the creatures were like. They were very much like drunks in a
terrestrial bar. I think a good job was done, but I wouldn't say they were
really alien.
In response to those who say his own aliens are convincingly realistic in their
psychology, Clement reveals the secret of how he constructs them. For those
people who say that my aliens are noticeably alien, not human in psychology, I'm
afraid I have a rather cynical answer. My secret for making a being seem non
-human is to make him act rationally. For example, I can be fairly specific
about this one. In the sequel to Mission of Gravity, Starlight, at one point I
had one of my Mesklinites driving one of these giant tanks along completely
unknown territory. And nothing was happening. He wanted to get somewhere. And he
gradually began going a little faster, a little faster as a human being would
do. Then he suddenly realized what he was doing and slowed down again, which is,
of course, the rational thing to do. My own suspicion is that nine human beings
out of ten would not have slowed down until they'd run into something. We'll
have more on Hal Clement tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. The April 1953 issue of Astounding Science
Fiction contained the beginning of a serial which was to become a science
fiction classic. The serial, when completed and published as a novel a year
later, was entitled Mission of Gravity. The author was Hal Clement. The story is
standard fare for science fiction. Space exploration by Earthman, which results
in contact with an alien culture. What sets the novel apart from others of its
type, though, is its hard science background. Clement has meticulously
constructed an entire planet in great scientific detail, and then he created
creatures specifically tailored for the world. The planet is called Mesklin, one
of the most famous worlds in science fiction. We asked Clement how he developed
it. It was mostly slide rule work. Part of it was my contrary nature. I had read
stories in which planets had extra heavy gravity, stories in which the planets
had very light gravity, and it seemed sort of, of course, there could be no
planet with varying gravity, and I took the of course as a challenge. So I went
to work. I am, as I say, a rather firm materialist. I have serious doubts in
things like gravity screens, anti-gravity machines. The only thing I could think
of which would produce such a variation was rapid spin, and this was before you
could steal time on computers because they hadn't been invented. I did a good
deal of slide rule work and also some consultation with such astronomy text as I
could get hold of, and I came up with what seemed to be a valid planet at the
time. Mesklin spins so rapidly that it's flattened to a disk shape, and the
gravity varies from three times that of Earth at the equator to 650 times at the
poles. Men from Earth have sent an exploratory probe to Mesklin's surface, but
they can't get it back because of the incredibly heavy gravity. So they enlist
the help of some native Mesklinites who resemble 15-inch long caterpillars. The
story itself is a fascinating one, but equally fascinating is the scientific
detail Clement provides a setting for the narrative. The gravity is so heavy,
for example, that a fall of a few inches would crush a Mesklinite. The
Mesklinites are so used to staying close to the ground that to see one of them
climbing anything would drive the others mad.
Clement has written of something he calls the game, by which he means a contest
between writer and reader. In the game, a reader of a science fiction story
tries to find statements or ideas which conflict with current science. The
writer, on the other hand, tries to make as few slips as he possibly can.
Clement says that a group of very intelligent readers played the game with
Mission of Gravity. Somebody was playing the game. I believe it was a group of
members of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Science Fiction Society,
MITSFS for short, and they began taking Mesklin apart mathematically. I
understand from some of them that the planet actually should come to a sharp
edge at the equator, instead of a smooth curve. But I am not a good enough
mathematician myself to check up on this point.
Clement wrote a sequel to Mission of Gravity, which came out in 1970. It's
called Starlight, and it continues the strange relationship between Mesklinites
and humans. He explains why he did the sequel. In a sense, I was talked into it.
I'm very uneasy about sequels and series stories in general. My experience has
been reading them, but I was always disappointed by the later ones. I'd formed
my opinion of what things were like, and the later stories usually changed those
opinions that disappointed me. The Mission of Gravity sequel came as a result of
a conversation, I think at one of the New York conventions, a fan said
something, and I can't now remember exactly what it was, which sounded like a
good idea to use the Mesklinites, and I built it up from there. Mission of
Gravity is probably the best of all hard science fiction novels. Any serious
reader of science fiction should be familiar with it.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.